# PLACE Interfaces

Due to the sheer number of options available in PLACE, operating it via the
command-line interface, while possible, is cumbersome. In order to provide
users with easy access to all PLACE options, a web interface has been
developed. The web interface runs in JavaScript, making it well supported
across operating systems. However, to ease in the development of JavaScript,
the programming language [Elm](https://elm-lang.org) is highly recommended. Elm
is a strongly-typed, functional programming language that can be easily
compiled to JavaScript.

## Brief Elm introduction

Elm is probably new to most users of PLACE and, being a functional language, it
will appear different from many languages you have encountered in the past.
Rest assured, though, that our goal is not to teach you to program in Elm, but
rather to give you some simple tools for constructing basic user interfaces
using Elm.

As the term implies, functional languages treat everything as a function. Look
at a simple statement like:

    x = 1

This does not create a variable named `x` and give it the value `1`. Instead,
this creates a function named `x` that takes no inputs and always produces `1`.
Thus we cannot change the value of `x` to something else. It is this
differentiation that usually causes the most confustion, but you will get used
to it quickly.

When a function take arguments, they are simply listed after the function name.
Like this:

    squareThis number = number * number

In this example, `squareThis` is the function name, `number` is the argument.
In Python, this would essentially be the same code as this:

    def squareThis(number):
        return number * number

Okay, that's a good start. The only other thing I want you to know right now is
that we often will explicitly list the types being used in a function. So, you
will often see our `squareThis` function written like this:

    squareThis : Float -> Float
    squareThis number = number * number

The 'type line' just tells us that this function takes in one floating point
value and produces a new one. To compare, our simple `x = 1` line would have a
type line like `x : Int` to tell us that it took in nothing and produced an
integer.

My best advice at this point is just to move on. This won't make complete sense
now, but you will usually have plenty of examples to use so it doesn't matter.

## Making HTML with Elm

The main reason we have Elm is to produce solid JavaScript. And the main reason
we have JavaScript is to produce solid HTML. We will refer to the HTML as the
*view*, and it is what the user will see in their web browser. Most of our Elm
code will be used to build this.

In Elm, an HTML block has a special type, called `Html Msg`. As you can see,
this type has two words instead of just one. When you have a type with multiple
words, it is kind of like having all these types stuck together.  What this
means to us is that all the HTML generated by Elm will produce some HTML for
the user (the *HTML*) to see and some messages (the *Msg*) used to manipulate
what is displayed on the web page.  For instance, when they see an HTML button,
they can click it and generate a *message*.

The *messages* generated by the user will update a *model* that sits inside the
code. In PLACE, this model is typically the values your module is looking for
in the JSON config data. But if you haven't read about that yet, don't worry.

All the above concepts come together into an `Html.program`, which is just a
way to wrap up all the things Elm needs into a nice little package.

If you feel like you need to learn more about Elm, you can go through [their
tutorial](https://guide.elm-lang.org/). Otherwise, I'm going to start talking
about making a web interface for a PLACE module.

## Starting your module

A lot of the Elm code will start the same way, so we have included a template
to use when starting a new module. You can find it
[here](https://github.com/PALab/place/blob/master/elm/plugins/PLACETemplate.elm)

## To be continued...
